>> Narrator: UP NEXT, AN
UNEXPLAINED DEATH HAD MEDICAL
EXPERTS BAFFLED.
>> AT THE END OF THE AUTOPSY, I
DIDN'T FIND ANYTHING SLIGHTLY
WRONG WHATSOEVER.
>> Narrator: EACH NEW CLUE
RAISES MORE QUESTIONS...
>> THE TRAIL'S GETTING WARMER
AND WARMER.
>> Narrator: ...UNTIL A
MICROSCOPIC CLUE REVEALS THE
ULTIMATE BETRAYAL.
>> NO ONE WOULD EVER EXPECT
SOMEONE WOULD DO THIS SORT OF
THING TO ANOTHER HUMAN BEING.
[ MARCHING BAND MUSIC PLAYING ]
>> Narrator: FALL MEANS FOOTBALL
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA.
[ MUSIC CONTINUES ]
IT'S ALSO TIME FOR THOUSANDS OF
STUDENTS TO GET BACK TO THEIR
STUDIES.
24-YEAR-OLD MICHELLE HERNDON WAS
ENTERING HER SENIOR YEAR.
AFTER GRADUATION, SHE HOPED TO
DO VOLUNTEER WORK.
>> SHE WANTED TO GO JOIN THE
PEACE CORPS.
SHE HAD A VERY LONG LIST OF
DREAMS AND HOPES TO ACCOMPLISH.
>> Narrator: TO PAY HER WAY
THROUGH SCHOOL, MICHELLE WORKED
AS A PERSONAL TRAINER.
BETWEEN CLASSES AND HER JOB,
MICHELLE KEPT TO A PREDICTABLE
SCHEDULE.
[ BELL TOLLS ]
BUT ONE DAY SHORTLY BEFORE
THANKSGIVING, SHE DIDN'T ATTEND
ANY OF HER CLASSES OR SHOW UP
FOR WORK.
>> THIS WAS SO UNLIKE HER -- NOT
TO RETURN HER CALLS OR NOT TO
SHOW UP -- AND I GUESS THEIR
SIXTH SENSE WAS THAT SOMETHING
IS VERY, VERY WRONG.
>> Narrator: MICHELLE'S FIANCé,
JASON DOYLE, IMMEDIATELY DROVE
THE 400 MILES FROM HIS HOME IN
MIAMI TO MICHELLE'S HOME IN
GAINESVILLE TO SEE WHAT WAS
WRONG.
>> HE FINDS MICHELLE'S HOUSE IS
LOCKED UP.
ALL THE DOORS ARE LOCKED.
ALL THE WINDOWS ARE LOCKED.
THE OUTSIDE LIGHTS ARE STILL ON,
AS THEY WOULD HAVE BEEN LEFT ON
FROM THE NIGHT BEFORE.
>> HER DOG WAS INSIDE, AND THE
TV WAS ON.
THROUGH A CRACK IN THE BLINDS,
JASON COULD ACTUALLY SEE WHAT
LATER TURNED OUT TO BE
MICHELLE'S FOOT.
>> Narrator: WHEN POLICE
ARRIVED, THEY FOUND MICHELLE'S
BODY IN HER BEDROOM, FACEDOWN.
IT WAS CLEAR SHE'D BEEN DEAD FOR
SOME TIME.
>> SHE WAS IN THIS SOMEWHAT
AWKWARD POSITION WITH HER LEFT
ARM FOLDED UP UNDERNEATH HER
BODY.
>> Narrator: AT FIRST GLANCE,
THERE WAS NO TRAUMA TO THE
BODY -- NO BRUISES, NO WOUNDS,
NO BLOOD.
>> WE HAD NO INDICATION OF WHAT
WOULD HAVE CAUSED HER DEATH.
>> Narrator: THE MEDICAL
EXAMINER THOUGHT THE POSITION OF
MICHELLE'S BODY, FACEDOWN, WAS
UNUSUAL.
>> IF SOMEBODY IS SICK AND IN
THE PROCESS OF DYING, MOST FOLKS
TEND TO END UP EITHER ON THEIR
SIDE OR ON THEIR BACK.
>> Narrator: THERE WERE NO
FOREIGN FINGERPRINTS IN THE
APARTMENT, NO SIGNS OF FORCED
ENTRY, AND NO VALUABLES WERE
MISSING.
>> HER VCR, HER TELEVISION SET,
HER RADIO, JEWELRY -- IT WAS ALL
INTACT.
>> Narrator: AND THERE WAS NO
INDICATION THIS WAS A SUICIDE.
>> IF IT'S GONNA BE A SUICIDE,
THERE'S GONNA BE PILL BOTTLES
LAYING AROUND AND FREQUENTLY A
NOTE.
THERE WAS NONE OF THAT ON THIS
CASE.
>> Narrator: THERE WAS A
HALF-FULL BOTTLE OF BEER NEXT TO
MICHELLE'S BODY.
ONLY MICHELLE'S FINGERPRINTS
WERE ON THE BOTTLE.
>> THERE WAS NO INDICATION THAT
SHE HAD GOT DRUNK OFF THE ONE
BEER THAT WAS LYING ON THE BED.
THERE WAS OTHER BEER IN THE
REFRIGERATOR.
THERE WAS JUST NOTHING TO
INDICATE THAT SHE HAD PASSED OUT
DRUNK.
>> WE WANTED TO SEE IF, PERHAPS,
SOMETHING HAD BEEN INSIDE OF THE
BEER BOTTLE -- PERHAPS FOUL
PLAY, A SUBSTANCE PLACED IN THE
BEER BOTTLE -- THAT MAY HAVE
CONTRIBUTED TO HER DEATH.
>> Narrator: BUT NO FOREIGN
SUBSTANCES WERE FOUND INSIDE THE
BOTTLE.
>> IT WAS BAFFLING.
"WOW.
HOW COULD THIS HEALTHY,
24-YEAR-OLD YOUNG LADY HAVE
DIED?
AND IS IT EVEN POSSIBLE THAT SHE
WOULD HAVE SIMPLY DIED OF
NATURAL CAUSES?"
>> Narrator: IN MOST CASES, THE
MEDICAL EXAMINER DOESN'T HAVE
MUCH DIFFICULTY DETERMINING THE
CAUSE AND MANNER OF AN
INDIVIDUAL'S DEATH.
BUT MICHELLE HERNDON'S CASE WAS
DIFFERENT.
>> AT THE END OF THE AUTOPSY, I
REALLY HAD NO IDEA.
I DIDN'T FIND ANYTHING...
ANYTHING SLIGHTLY WRONG
WHATSOEVER.
>> TO FIND SOMEBODY THAT'S
DECEASED WITHOUT ANY INDICATION
OF WHAT CAUSED THEM TO DIE,
ESPECIALLY SOMEBODY THAT'S THAT
YOUNG, WAS HIGHLY UNUSUAL.
>> Narrator: THE MEDICAL
EXAMINER ESTIMATED THAT MICHELLE
DIED ABOUT 24 HOURS BEFORE HER
BODY WAS FOUND.
SO INVESTIGATORS INTERVIEWED
EVERYONE WHO WAS WITH MICHELLE
DURING THAT TIME FRAME.
THEY ALSO CHECKED THE ALIBIS OF
THOSE CLOSEST TO MICHELLE,
INCLUDING HER FIANCé.
>> JASON -- SQUEAKY CLEAN.
JASON HAD AN ALIBI OF BEING AT
WORK AND WAS QUICKLY REMOVED AS
A POTENTIAL SUSPECT.
>> Narrator: THEN THE MEDICAL
EXAMINER TOOK A CLOSER LOOK AT
SOMETHING ON MICHELLE'S LEFT
ARM -- A TINY MARK, SMALLER THAN
MOST NEEDLE MARKS.
>> WE NEEDED TO FIND THE
EXPLANATION FOR THAT PUNCTURE
WOUND, AND THERE COULD BE A VERY
LEGITIMATE EXPLANATION FOR IT.
>> Narrator: BUT MICHELLE'S
PERSONAL PHYSICIAN SAID SHE
DIDN'T HAVE ANY BLOOD DRAWN
BEFORE HER DEATH OR RECEIVE ANY
INJECTIONS.
SO THE MEDICAL EXAMINER TOLD
INVESTIGATORS TO WIDEN THEIR
SEARCH AT THE CRIME SCENE,
LOOKING FOR POSSIBLE EVIDENCE OF
DRUG USE OR AN OVERDOSE.
>> IN A CASE LIKE THIS WHERE WE
HAVE NO CLUES, EVERY CLUE IS
SIGNIFICANT.
>> Narrator: INVESTIGATORS
NOTICED THAT THE TRASH CANS
INSIDE MICHELLE'S APARTMENT WERE
EMPTY.
ON A HUNCH, THEY LOOKED OUTSIDE
THE APARTMENT TO SEE WHERE THE
TRASH WAS KEPT FOR DISPOSAL.
>> WE WENT OVER TO WHERE THE
TRASH BINS FOR THAT PARTICULAR
LITTLE COMMUNITY ARE STORED, AND
ON THE GROUND, IN A SMALL
PLASTIC BAG, I COULD SEE -- WHAT
WAS VISIBLE WAS A BOTTLE, A
PHARMACEUTICAL BOTTLE.
AND I CALLED THE INVESTIGATOR
OVER AND SAID, "WE GOT TO LOOK
AT THIS."
>> Narrator: THE BAG CONTAINED
TWO VIALS OF A DRUG LABELED
"PROPOFOL," SOME SYRINGES, AND A
PEDIATRIC BUTTERFLY I.V.
>> AND IT OBVIOUSLY HAD COME
FROM MICHELLE'S HOUSE 'CAUSE
CONTAINED WITHIN THE BAG WAS
SOME MAIL THAT HAD BEEN
ADDRESSED TO HER.
>> TO USE A PEDIATRIC BUTTERFLY
I.V. -- IS TINY.
IT WOULD LEAVE A TINY, LITTLE
PINPRICK THAT WOULD BE VERY HARD
TO DISCOVER.
>> Narrator: THE ITEMS WERE
DUSTED FOR FINGERPRINTS, BUT
NONE WERE FOUND.
INVESTIGATORS NEEDED TO KNOW
WHAT PROPOFOL WAS USED FOR.
>> PROPOFOL IS, IN A NUTSHELL,
THE WORLD'S MOST POWERFUL
ANTI-BREATHING DRUG.
IN THE MEDICAL SETTING, IT'S
USED BY ANESTHESIOLOGISTS TO
ESSENTIALLY PUT PEOPLE TO SLEEP.
>> Narrator: PROPOFOL, A
PRESCRIPTION SEDATIVE, IS AN
INTRAVENOUS MEDICATION
ADMINISTERED BY MEDICAL
PROFESSIONALS.
>> THE KIND OF ANESTHETIC THAT
WHEN IT'S ADMINISTERED, THE
ANESTHESIOLOGIST SAYS, "COUNT
BACKWARD FROM 100," AND YOU GET
TO ABOUT 99...
VERY POWERFUL STUFF.
>> Narrator: TOO MUCH PROPOFOL
CAN CAUSE DEATH WITHIN SECONDS.
INVESTIGATORS ASKED THAT
MICHELLE'S TOXICOLOGY TEST BE
SCREENED SPECIFICALLY FOR
PROPOFOL.
>> IT'S HIGHLY UNUSUAL.
WE WOULDN'T TYPICALLY SEE
PROPOFOL IN OUR DRUG SCREEN.
SO WE'VE NEVER DETECTED IT IN
OTHER CASES.
>> Narrator: AS EXPECTED, TESTS
WERE POSITIVE FOR PROPOFOL.
>> I CAN'T SAY WITH SPECIFICITY
HOW MUCH DRUG SHE GOT.
>> Narrator: BUT ONE THING WAS
CLEAR -- THE DOSE WAS LETHAL.
>> THE AMOUNT OF DRUG THAT WAS
ADMINISTERED WAS SUFFICIENT TO
CAUSE SOMEONE TO FALL
UNCONSCIOUS AND TO STOP
BREATHING.
>> Narrator: TO THE MEDICAL
EXAMINER, IT ALL STARTED TO MAKE
SENSE.
WHOEVER IT WAS USED A
PEDIATRIC-SIZE NEEDLE TO MAKE
THE TINY PUNCTURE WOUND IN
MICHELLE'S LEFT ARM, SINCE THERE
WAS VIRTUALLY NO HEMORRHAGING.
>> ALL OF THOSE THINGS WERE
HIGHLY SUGGESTIVE OF SOMEBODY
WHO HAS A LOT OF SKILL IN THIS.
>> Narrator: THE MEDICAL
EXAMINER BELIEVED THAT THIS WAS
THE WORK OF A MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL, MOST LIKELY
SOMEONE WHO WORKED IN A HOSPITAL
AND PROBABLY SOMEONE MICHELLE
KNEW.
>> WHOEVER HAD INJECTED
MICHELLE HERNDON WAS SOMEONE
THAT, FOR WHATEVER THE REASONS
WERE, SHE HAD TRUSTED ENOUGH TO
OFFER THAT PERSON HER LEFT ARM.
>> SHE WOULD NOT HAVE BEEN ABLE
TO ADMINISTER THE DOSE AND THEN
CLEAN UP AND TAKE THE MEDICAL
WASTE THE 60 FEET FROM HER BODY
WHERE IT WAS LOCATED.
>> Narrator: BUT WHO WAS THIS
PERSON?
TO FIND OUT, DETECTIVE
MARC WOODMANSEE CAME UP WITH AN
IDEA THAT CHANGED THE COURSE OF
THE INVESTIGATION.
HE TOLD ANALYSTS TO TEST THE
SYRINGE CAPS FOUND IN MICHELLE'S
TRASH.
>> I CAN REMEMBER SEEING MEDICAL
STAFF HOLD NEEDLE CAPS IN THEIR
MOUTH WHILE THEY WERE GIVING AN
INJECTION, AND I THOUGHT THAT
THERE WAS A POTENTIAL THERE FOR
SALIVA DNA.
>> I THOUGHT THAT WAS RATHER
BRILLIANT, IN FACT.
>> Narrator: DNA ANALYSTS
SWABBED THE NEEDLE CAPS AND
FOUND BIOLOGICAL MATERIAL.
>> ON THE NEEDLE CAP OR COVER,
THERE WAS AN UNKNOWN MALE DNA
PROFILE.
>> Narrator: AND SCIENTISTS ALSO
FOUND DNA INSIDE THE SYRINGE...
>> I WAS ABLE TO DETERMINE THAT
MS. HERNDON'S DNA WAS PRESENT IN
ONE OF THEM.
>> Narrator: ...PROOF IT HAD
BEEN USED ON MICHELLE.
>> THE SUBSTANCE THAT WAS FOUND
IN THE CATHETER WAS A MIXTURE OF
MICHELLE'S BLOOD AND PROPOFOL.
>> Narrator: MICHELLE'S DEATH
WAS NOW CLASSIFIED AS A
HOMICIDE, AND THE MURDER WEAPON
WAS PROPOFOL.
>> I'VE NEVER SEEN A
PROPOFOL-RELATED DEATH, EVER.
>> Narrator: BUT WHO WANTED
MICHELLE DEAD?
>> Narrator: MICHELLE HERNDON'S
DEATH HAD BEEN RULED A HOMICIDE.
THE CAUSE OF DEATH -- AN
OVERDOSE OF THE PRESCRIPTION
DRUG PROPOFOL.
PROPOFOL IS A SHORT-ACTING
INTRAVENOUS SEDATIVE USED IN
GENERAL ANESTHESIA.
BUT IT'S ALSO USED TO TREAT
OTHER MEDICAL CONDITIONS.
>> PROPOFOL HAS BEEN SUGGESTED
AS A MEDICATION TO TREAT
MIGRAINES.
IT'S NOT A CLEAR INDICATION OR
A DEFINITIVE INDICATION TO TREAT
MIGRAINES, BUT IT HAS BEEN
REPORTED TO BE HELPFUL TO TREAT
MIGRAINES.
>> Narrator: DETECTIVES LEARNED
THAT MICHELLE HERNDON HAD BEEN A
LIFELONG MIGRAINE SUFFERER.
>> FROM WHAT I UNDERSTAND, THEY
WERE BAD.
>> I'VE NEVER HAD ONE, BUT
PEOPLE WHO SUFFER FROM THESE
THINGS TELL ME THEY'RE JUST
ABSOLUTELY HORRIBLE AND WOULD GO
TO THE ENDS OF THE EARTH TO GET
SOME RELIEF FROM THE PAIN.
>> Narrator: WAS IT POSSIBLE
THAT MICHELLE HAD SOUGHT PAIN
MEDICATION FROM SOMEONE OTHER
THAN HER DOCTOR?
>> THEY JUST WANTED TO KNOW IF
MICHELLE KNEW ANYBODY IN THE
MEDICAL FIELD...
THE ONLY PERSON I KNEW WAS
OLIVER.
>> Narrator: "OLIVER" WAS
30-YEAR-OLD OLIVER O'QUINN, AN
INTENSIVE-CARE NURSE AT
SHANDS HOSPITAL ON THE CAMPUS OF
THE UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA.
A BACKGROUND CHECK REVEALED
MICHELLE AND OLIVER WERE CASUAL
FRIENDS.
>> I'D DESCRIBE HIM AS "QUIRKY."
AND "ODD" IS DEFINITELY A GOOD
ADJECTIVE.
THERE WAS JUST SOMETHING ABOUT
HIM, SOMETHING THAT HE FELT LIKE
HE HAD TO GO THE EXTRA MILE TO
PROVE HIMSELF, WHERE MOST PEOPLE
WOULD JUST BE THEMSELVES.
THE WAY HE ACTED ABOUT MICHELLE,
I KIND OF KNEW FROM WHEN HE
FIRST MET HER THAT HE HAD HAD A
CRUSH ON HER.
>> I THINK SHE MADE COMMENTS TO
BOTH HER FRIENDS AND HER MOTHER
THAT HE WAS WEIRD AND THAT SHE
FELT SORRY FOR HIM.
>> Narrator: THEN POLICE
DISCOVERED SOME TROUBLING
INFORMATION.
A REVIEW OF MICHELLE'S PHONE
RECORDS SHOWED THAT O'QUINN'S
INTEREST IN MICHELLE BORDERED ON
HARASSMENT.
>> HE HAD CALLED
MICHELLE HERNDON 43 TIMES IN
LESS THAN A MONTH.
AND HE HAD CALLED
MICHELLE HERNDON EVERY SINGLE
DAY FOR NINE STRAIGHT DAYS
PRECEDING HER MURDER.
HE NEVER CALLS HER AGAIN.
HE KNOWS THERE'S NO ONE THERE TO
ANSWER.
>> Narrator: O'QUINN'S JOB IN
THE INTENSIVE-CARE UNIT WOULD
HAVE GIVEN HIM ACCESS TO
PEDIATRIC BUTTERFLY I.V.s LIKE
THE ONES FOUND IN MICHELLE'S
TRASH.
INVESTIGATORS WANTED TO SEE IF
THEY COULD LINK O'QUINN TO THE
TWO BOTTLES OF PROPOFOL.
>> THE IMPORTANT THING TO ME AT
THIS POINT IS TO TRACK THESE
DRUGS.
WHERE DID THEY COME FROM?
HOW CAN I PUT THEM IN AN
INDIVIDUAL'S HAND?
>> Narrator: THE VIALS OF
PROPOFOL HAVE A
NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL NUMBER AND
A LOT NUMBER.
>> THOSE SPECIFIC BOTTLES OF
PROPOFOL WERE SHIPPED BY
McKESSON DISTRIBUTORS OUT OF
LAKELAND, FLORIDA.
>> Narrator: FROM THERE, THEY
WERE SHIPPED TO THE
SHANDS HOSPITAL AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA.
>> THEY WERE SHIPPED DURING THE
TIME PERIOD OF WHEN
OLIVER O'QUINN WAS EMPLOYED
THERE.
>> Narrator: SPECIFICALLY, THEY
WERE PLACED IN AN AUTOMATED
DISPENSING MACHINE IN THE
HOSPITAL I.C.U.
>> I TRACED IT TO A MACHINE THAT
OPERATES KIND OF LIKE A SODA
MACHINE.
YOU PUNCH IN THE PATIENT NUMBER,
AND IT DROPS A BOTTLE OF A
PHARMACEUTICAL IN YOUR HAND.
>> Narrator: TO GET THE PROPOFOL
FROM THE DISPENSING MACHINE, A
HOSPITAL EMPLOYEE HAD TO ENTER
HIS EMPLOYEE NUMBER.
AND WHOSE CODE WAS ENTERED TO
GET THESE TWO VIALS?
REGISTERED NURSE OLIVER O'QUINN.
>> SO, I ACTUALLY HAD THAT
PROPOFOL ALL THE WAY FROM THE
MANUFACTURER IN MASSACHUSETTS TO
OLIVER O'QUINN'S HAND IN THE
SURGICAL-INTENSIVE-CARE UNIT AT
THE HOSPITAL.
>> Narrator: ALL INVESTIGATORS
NEEDED NOW WAS A SAMPLE OF
O'QUINN'S DNA TO COMPARE TO THE
DNA ON THE NEEDLE CAPS FOUND IN
MICHELLE'S TRASH.
WHEN POLICE WENT TO QUESTION
HIM, THEY LEARNED HE HAD FLED
THE COUNTRY AND WAS IN IRELAND,
WHERE HE HAD APPLIED FOR A
NURSING LICENSE.
>> HE DOESN'T EVER INTEND ON
COMING BACK TO THE U.S.
IT'S VERY DIFFICULT TO EXTRADITE
SOMEONE BACK FROM IRELAND.
>> I SPOKE WITH THE LADY WHO WAS
IN CHARGE OF JUST EXTRADITION
FROM THE REPUBLIC OF IRELAND,
AND I TOLD HER, "LOOK, I'VE GOT
A WARRANT IN MY HAND.
I WANT TO ARREST THIS MAN."
AND SHE SAID TO ME, TO THE
EFFECT, YOU KNOW, "SLOW DOWN,
COLUMBO.
IT'S GONNA BE -- IT'S A VERY
LONG PROCESS."
>> Narrator: BUT WHAT WAS
O'QUINN'S MOTIVE TO KILL
MICHELLE?
AND WOULD INVESTIGATORS FIND A
WAY TO GET HIM BACK TO THE
UNITED STATES?
>> Narrator: INVESTIGATORS HAD
TWO PROBLEMS IN THE MURDER OF
MICHELLE HERNDON.
FIRST, THEY COULDN'T UNDERSTAND
WHY THEIR PRIME SUSPECT,
OLIVER O'QUINN, WOULD KILL HER.
AND SECOND, O'QUINN HAD FLED THE
UNITED STATES TO IRELAND IN
ORDER TO AVOID PROSECUTION.
TO SMOKE HIM OUT, INVESTIGATORS
CONTACTED THE IRISH TIMES
NEWSPAPER.
>> AND E-MAILED THEM A PICTURE
OF MICHELLE, A PICTURE OF
OLIVER, AND A SYNOPSIS OF THE
HOMICIDE INVESTIGATION, AND
TELLING THEM, "HE IS WANTED FOR
MURDER IN THE UNITED STATES,"
AND THEY PUBLISHED IT ON THREE
SEPARATE OCCASIONS.
>> Narrator: FACING INCREASING
PRESSURE, O'QUINN LEFT IRELAND
AND FLEW TO THE WEST-AFRICAN
COUNTRY OF SENEGAL, WHERE HE WAS
IMMEDIATELY TURNED OVER TO U.S.
AUTHORITIES.
ONCE IN CUSTODY, INVESTIGATORS
GOT A COURT ORDER TO OBTAIN
O'QUINN'S DNA SAMPLE, WHICH WAS
THEN COMPARED TO THE DNA FOUND
ON THE SYRINGE CAP.
IT MATCHED.
>> TO ME, I WOULD EQUATE THAT
WITH GETTING THE SUSPECT'S
FINGERPRINT OFF THE TRIGGER OF
THE MURDER WEAPON.
>> [ CHUCKLES ]
OLIVER MADE A GREAT MANY
MISTAKES, THANK GOODNESS.
>> Narrator: OLIVER O'QUINN WAS
CHARGED WITH FIRST-DEGREE
MURDER.
THE ONLY REMAINING QUESTION WAS
MOTIVE.
>> I KNOW HE TRIED VERY HARD TO
INFUSE HIMSELF INTO MICHELLE'S
LIFE, AND, MOSTLY OUT OF PITY
AND FEELING SORRY FOR HIM, SHE
WOULD BRING HIM ALONG TO DO
THINGS WITH, TO GO OUT TO WATCH
A BAND, TO MEET IN THE MORNING
AND HAVE COFFEE.
>> Narrator: BUT IN CUSTODY,
OLIVER TOLD A FELLOW INMATE HE
GREW ANGRY WITH MICHELLE BECAUSE
HE OVERHEARD HER DURING A
TELEPHONE CONVERSATION SAYING
SOMETHING UNFLATTERING ABOUT
HIM.
>> SHE MADE SOME COMMENTS OF A
DEROGATORY NATURE ABOUT
OLIVER O'QUINN -- COMMENTS THAT
SHE DIDN'T EXPECT FOR HIM TO
HEAR, BUT HE DID HEAR.
>> Narrator: HE HEARD MICHELLE
REFER TO HIM AS "AN ANNOYING
LITTLE MAN."
>> AND WE BELIEVE, BECAUSE OF
THAT, THAT SENT HIM INTO THIS
MIND-SET THAT, "IF YOU'RE NEVER
GOING TO BE MINE, THEN YOU'RE
NEVER GONNA BE ANYBODY'S."
>> AND THE INMATE STATED THAT
OLIVER CONFIDED TO HIM THAT SHE
NEEDED A LONG SLEEP.
>> Narrator: PROSECUTORS BELIEVE
O'QUINN HATCHED A PLAN.
HE TOLD MICHELLE THE NEXT TIME
SHE HAD A MIGRAINE HEADACHE,
HE'D BE WILLING TO COME TO HER
APARTMENT AND GIVE HER SOMETHING
THAT WOULD GET RID OF THE PAIN
QUICKLY.
THE EVIDENCE SHOWS HE GOT THE
PROPOFOL FROM WORK, TYPING HIS
EMPLOYEE NUMBER INTO THE
MEDICATION-CONTROL SYSTEM
DESIGNED SPECIFICALLY TO PREVENT
THIS VERY ABUSE.
THEN HE WAITED FOR MICHELLE TO
CALL.
WHEN SHE DID, OLIVER PUT HIS
PLAN INTO ACTION.
ON THE NIGHT MICHELLE HAD THE
MIGRAINE, OLIVER STOPPED BY HER
APARTMENT ON HIS WAY HOME FROM
WORK.
HE INJECTED MICHELLE WITH A
LETHAL DOSE OF PROPOFOL USING A
SMALL PEDIATRIC SYRINGE.
BUT HE DID SOMETHING MEDICAL
PROFESSIONALS OFTEN DO -- USED
HIS TEETH TO PULL THE PLASTIC
CAP OFF THE SYRINGE AND LEFT
BEHIND THE DNA THAT LATER
IDENTIFIED HIM.
MICHELLE WAS DEAD WITHIN
SECONDS.
HE POSITIONED HER ARM UNDERNEATH
HER BODY SO THE NEEDLE MARK
WOULDN'T BE EASILY NOTICEABLE.
HE THREW THE SYRINGES AND
PROPOFOL BOTTLES INTO A PLASTIC
BAG, WHICH HE TOSSED INTO THE
DUMPSTER BEHIND MICHELLE'S
RENTED HOME, NOT REALIZING THE
OBVIOUS -- THAT THOSE SERIAL
NUMBERS COULD BE TRACED.
>> I BELIEVE THAT THE PAIN WAS
SUCH THAT SHE ENTRUSTED
OLIVER O'QUINN TO ADMINISTER THE
PAIN RELIEVER.
AND I THINK THAT HE TOOK
ADVANTAGE OF THAT TRUST AND
INTENTIONALLY TOOK HER LIFE WITH
THE PROPOFOL.
>> Narrator: OLIVER O'QUINN WENT
ON TRIAL FOR FIRST-DEGREE
MURDER.
HIS DEFENSE CLAIMED HE GAVE
MICHELLE THE PROPOFOL TO HELP
RELIEVE THE PAIN FROM HER
MIGRAINE HEADACHE BUT
ACCIDENTALLY GAVE HER TOO MUCH.
>> THERE'S NO WAY THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION OF PROPOFOL TO
MICHELLE HERNDON WAS AN
ACCIDENTAL DEATH.
THIS WAS AN ACTION CONSISTENT
WITH HOMICIDE.
>> Narrator: THE JURY DIDN'T
BELIEVE IT, EITHER.
O'QUINN WAS CONVICTED OF
FIRST-DEGREE MURDER AND
SENTENCED TO LIFE IN PRISON
WITHOUT PAROLE.
>> THIS IS THE FIRST-REPORTED
CASE EVER INVOLVING MURDER BY
THE USE OF PROPOFOL, SO THIS
ENTIRE CASE WAS DRIVEN BY AND
SOLVED BY FORENSICS.
>> THERE IS NO EYEWITNESS, SO
HOW DO YOU PUT A PERSON THERE
WITHOUT EVIDENCE?
I MEAN, WITHOUT THE EVIDENCE, I
DON'T THINK IT WOULD HAVE
WORKED.
>> EVERYBODY DID THEIR JOB, AND
THEY DID A GREAT JOB, AND IT ALL
CAME TOGETHER.
>> I'VE NEVER HAD A CASE WHERE
THE SMALL THINGS MATTERED SO
MUCH...
WHERE SOMETHING AS SMALL AS A
NEEDLE MARK OR THE AMOUNT OF DNA
LEFT ON A NEEDLE CAP PLAYED SUCH
A PIVOTAL ROLE IN THE RESOLUTION
OF THE CASE.